A Study of the August Revolution of 1945 and its 
Impact on Colonial French and Japanese Rule in 
Vietnam 
 
Quynh Anh Tran 
 
The Newman School, USA 
 
ABSTRACT 
 
The August Revolution of 1945 posed a significant challenge to colonial French and Japanese rule in Vi-etnam. 
This paper aims to examine the extent of this challenge and its impact on the dynamics of power in the region. 
Through an analysis of historical events and primary sources, the paper seeks to shed light on the revolutionary 
forces at play and their role in shaping the trajectory of Vietnam's struggle for inde -pendence.  The August 
Revolution of 1945 challenged French and Japanese colonial rule through long-term planning, internal support, 
OSS influence, and the establishment of an independent government by the Viet Minh guerrilla troops. The 
Vietnamese people took advantage of the power vacuum left by the Japanese coup d'état against French officials 
in Indochina. This, combined with the determination and anticolonial spirit of the Vietnamese people, led to the 
success of the August Revolution. The Viet Minh further consolidated their power by garnering support from 
the rural population and receiving military aid and training from the United States OSS.  
 
Introduction 
 
Vietnam is a country known for its rebellious people, from the Trung sisters’ uprising against the Han dynasty's 
domination of Vietnam (New World Encyclopedia, 2022) to the resistance against Mongol inva -sion (Britan-
nica, The Editors of Encyclopaedia, 2016), and most prominently, French colonization. When considering the 
success of each uprising and revolution against foreign rule, the August Revolution was one of the most signif-
icant events that marked the turning point for Vietnam’s independence.  
Vietnam has been under colonial French rule since the late 1800s. Napoleon III decided to invade 
Vietnam in 1857, with an interest in expanding overseas markets and the French share of Asian territories 
(Buttinger, Joseph, and William J Duiker, 2019). Under French colonial rule, Vietnam was governed as part of 
French Indochina, including Cambodia and Laos. They introduced modern infrastructure, such as rail-ways and 
roads, and established a centralized administrative system (Ladenburg, Thomas, 2007). Prior to the August 
Revolution, the French administration held complete control over key aspects of governance, economy, and 
society. In 1897, French rule was firmly established in Vietnam under the governance of Gov.-Gen. Paul Dou-
mer  (Buttinger, Joseph, and William J Duiker, 2016). At every level of administration, the Vietnamese bureau-
cracy lost its influence as it became subject to direct control from French authori-ties, and Vietnamese emperors 
were removed (Cady, 1996). Vietnamese workers have attempted to host strikes and demonstrations throughout 
French colonial rule to challenge their systemic exploitation. For instance, the Yen Bai uprising of 1930, which 
was part of the Nghe-Tinh Soviet Movement organized by Viet Nam Quoc Dan (Vietnamese Nationalist Party) 
aimed to overthrow the French while simultaneously promoting Communist -led nationalism (Bernal, Martin, 
1981). Yet wasn’t until 1945, through the August Revolution that the Viet Minh (Central Committee of the 
Communist Party) led by the first president of the Democratic Republic of Vietnam, Ho Chi Minh, successfully 
Volume 13 Issue 2 (2024) 
ISSN: 2167-1907
www.JSR.org/hs
1

   
 
   
 
toppled the French and Japanese coloniza-tion in Vietnam. However, after France fell under Germany’s occu-
pation in 1940, Japan took advantage of the French weakness and stationed troops in French colonies and 
Northern Vietnam before they expand-ed their colonization over the rest of Indochina ever since 1941 (Alpha 
History, 2018). During the Japa-nese occupation of Vietnam in 1941, they made assurances to the Vichy French 
government about re-specting French sovereignty over their colonies in Indochina. Under Vichy's control, the 
French colonial administration, including its army of "native" troops, remained intact and continued to govern 
France's Indochina colonies as they had before. The Japanese considered this approach to be the most efficient 
and least burdensome way to control their new territory, as it required minimal involvement from the Japa-nese 
Army and allowed their troops to focus on other engagements. However, this soon changed when a Japanese 
coup d'etat successfully ousted the French from their administrative control and arrested them as prisoners in a 
short span of under 24 hours in March 1945 (Bartholomew-Feis, Dixee R, 2006). The Japanese troops launched 
Operation Meigo, an attack against the French armed forces on all strategic locations in Indochina. The collapse 
marked the complete downfall of the long-standing French colonial system that had endured for almost eight-
seven years. Thus, to determine the impact of the August Revo-lution on French colonial rule, it is important to 
also consider its influence on Japanese rule since Vietnam was under Japanese rule in 1945 instead of French 
colonial rule. Thus, this essay will elaborate on the research question: To what extent did the August Revolution 
of 1945 significantly challenge colonial French and Japanese Rule in Vietnam? It is worth investigating this 
question to highlight the effort of the Vietnamese fight for independence and determine the legitimacy of the 
revolution. A variety of primary and secondary sources such as biographies, journal articles, selected writings, 
and websites, will be used and analyzed to answer the research question. Both primary and secondary sources 
must be used to evaluate historical events to prevent one -sided arguments and biases, as primary sources are 
first-hand accounts or documents that offer direct evidence and insights to support secondary sources as evi-
dence for interpretation and analysis.   
 
Viet Minh’s Long-Term Leadership & Planning  
 
Some historians and anti-communists attributed the success of his leadership in the August Revolution to mere 
luck based on historical and international context (Khanh, H, 1971). At the end of World War II, colonial powers 
like France and Japan had weakened tremendously compared to the beginning of the war. As the Japanese coup 
d’etat overthrew the French administration in March 1945, the Vietnamese troops only had to face one enemy 
instead of two. This provided the Vietnamese revolution an opportunity to r ise and gain power. The Japanese 
killed, arrested, and imprisoned all French officials, taking over admin- istrative buildings like radio stations, 
banks, and industries (Hammer, 1948). They also gave government positions formerly held by French officials 
to the Vietnamese, placing the Nguyen Dynasty emperor, Bao Dai to cooperate with Japan and declare “inde-
pendence” from France (Worthing, 2001). After Bao Dai declared independence from France, Vietnam experi-
enced a period known as doc-lap banh ve, also known as “fake independence”, as Japan did not acknowledge 
Vietnam as an independent country but continued to hold administrative control over the country, ignoring 
Vietnam’s Prime Minister Tran Trong Kim and its newly formed government (Wise, 1991). It is important to 
note that the Vietnamese were in a favorable position during World War II. The opposing forces of the Japanese 
and French weakened each other and became susceptible to resistance. Moreover, Japan's defeat was an ideal 
chance for Vietnam to retaliate and claim authority. While these advantageous circumstances formed on a larger 
scale, it is essential to acknowledge that achieving victory also required suitable internal conditions and effec-
tive planning with-in Vietnam itself. Although international context does play a role in the success of the August 
Revolution, the Viet Minh’s role in planning coordinated actions and fostering unity among nationalist factions 
show-cases their effective leadership in guiding the revolution toward its goals of reuniting Vietnam as an inde-
pendent nation, free from French and Japanese imperialism. (Thai Quang Trung, 1985).  
Volume 13 Issue 2 (2024) 
ISSN: 2167-1907
www.JSR.org/hs
2

   
 
   
 
Planning for The August Revolution could be dated back to May 1941 with the establishment of the 
Viet Minh Front. A Vietnamese man named Nguyen Sinh Cung, later known as Nguyen Ai Quoc and Ho Chi 
Minh developed anti-colonial sentiments and embraced Communist ideology. Having traveled and worked in 
various countries, including France (Pierre Brocheux, 2007), Ho Chi Minh was exposed to ideas of nationalism, 
socialism, and anti-colonialism, which shaped his political beliefs and aspirations. He founded the Vietnamese 
Communist Party in 1930 and an umbrella group called the “Viet Minh Inde -pendence Movement” in 1941, 
hoping that Communist principles would provide a framework for achiev -ing Vietnamese independence and 
social equality (Evgenii Vasilevich, 1999). His leadership and organizing skills helped unite various groups in 
the resistance movement against both French and Japanese occupi -ers. He understood that to gain popularity 
and unite nationalist forces, it was necessary to call for the attention of the oppressed working class and lay out 
the principles to achieve the goal of overthrowing the French government. In one of his selected writings (1920-
1969) on the founding of the Indochinese Communist Party, he wrote: “The Indochinese Communist Party has 
been founded. It is the Party of the working class. It will help the proletariat lead the revolution waged for the 
sake of all oppressed and ex- ploited people…” (Foreign Languages Publishing House, 2003). He then pro-
ceeded to include slogans such as “To overthrow French imperialism and Vietnamese feudalism and reactionary 
bourgeoisie” and “To make Indochina completely independent”, putting Vietnamese independence and work-
ers' rights as the main objectives. By 1944, he established a base territory (Can-cu Dia) and armed forces with 
34 armed fighters and a few stolen rifles and bombs set up in mountainous regions in Cao Bang near Chinese 
bor-ders (Khanh, Huynh Kim, 1971). Two guerrilla forces the National Salvation Forces (Cuu -quoc-quan) 
united with the Vietnamese Propaganda Liberation Forces (Viet Nam tuyen Truyen Giao Phong) to form the 
Vi-etnamese Liberation Forces (Viet nam giai -phong quan) and recruit formerly local authorities and French 
militia once loyal to the French. The recruitment of French militia significantly weakened the hold of the French 
colonial administration and helped the Viet Minh guerilla troops to reach 3000 men. After the Japanese coup, 
the Viet Minh held a conference in Ha Noi between the 15th and 20th of April, 1945, out-lining a plan against 
the Japanese occupation of Vietnam through guerrilla warfare tactics across Vietnam (Truong, Chinh, 1971). 
They created a resolution that was published in the Nhan Dan journal, establishing 7 war zones and advocating 
for propaganda campaigns to call for a general insurrection against the Japa-nese by targeting both Vietnamese 
citizens and Japanese soldiers. Firstly, the Viet Minh published the “Resistance against Japan” (Kháng Nh ật) 
newspaper to spread their political agenda (Truong, Chinh, 1971). Propaganda was commonly conveyed 
through speeches delivered in factories, schools, markets, and public streets. As a result, more Vietnamese 
became involved in political strikes and discussions. According to Ngay Nay's journal of 1945, “after the brief 
storm of bullets of March 9, political parties, groups, and associations shot up like mushrooms” (Khanh, 1971). 
Although some of these political strikes were spontaneous and unorganized, they introduced the common Vi-
etnamese people to become familiar with revolutionary activities and prepared them for the upcoming revolu-
tion. Viet Minh’s distribution of propaganda campaigns and recruitment of former French sympathizers to its 
guerilla troops, coupled with the power vacuum of the Japanese coup d’etat marked Vietnam’s path to signifi-
cantly challenge the French and Japanese colonial rule.  
 
Population Support & OSS Inﬂuence  
 
Widespread discontent with French and Japanese colonial rule fueled Vietnamese nationalism and deter-mina-
tion to end French and Japanese colonial rule, which contributed to the August Revolution in 1945. Diplomat 
Bui Minh Dung, estimated that under Japanese control, the Vietnamese people experienced a massive famine 
called the Famine of 1945, approximately 1 million to 2 million people perished as a re -sult (Gunn, March 
2020). The Great Famine of 1944 to 1945 had various origins, according to different historians. Historian Pham 
Cao Duong attributes the famine to crop failures during the years 1943 to 1944, as well as the lack of dike 
maintenance after the US bombing of the north to disrupt communica-tions between Japanese forces in August 
Volume 13 Issue 2 (2024) 
ISSN: 2167-1907
www.JSR.org/hs
3

   
 
   
 
and September 1944. He also highlights the compulsory sale of rice to the state under Japanese rule as a major 
burden on the people. Even in regions where food was scarce, the people had to supply rice at low prices. Ngo 
Vinh Long affirms that the forced s ale of rice quo -tas imposed by the French colonial administration, along 
with the use of rice to make alcohol, contributed to starvation deaths. Brocheux and Hémery suggest that the 
crisis had demographic origins, with a rapidly growing population and unce rtain grain production (Geoffrey, 
2011). Historian Nguyen Khac Vien stated that the famine played a crucial role in setting the stage for the 
upcoming revolution, as the Viet Minh carried out operations to target Japanese granaries and rice storage 
facilities, breaking open rice stores to prevent starvation and urging peasants to oppose the forced sale of rice. 
They framed the famine as a joint oppressive action by the French and Japanese to physically eliminate the 
Vietnamese population. Interestingly, the famine in the northern region provided an ideal platform for the Viet 
Minh to highlight the deficiencies of the colonial regime. The Viet Minh not only utilized the famine as a tool 
for propagan-da but also mobilized the population to seize the food supplies stored by the French and under 
Japanese control since March 1945. Consequently, this led to increased support from the population, generating 
resentment towards both French and Japanese occupiers. Although the revolution resonated strongly with the 
Vietnamese population's ideals of self-determination and anticolonialism, it struggled to gain international sup-
port and recognition. In 1945 or at the end of World War II, the global political landscape was complex and 
unpredictable.  At the time, Vietnam ba sed its economy on agriculture and there was an inadequate supply of 
machinery or weapons to fight back the oppression (Cima, Ronald J, and Library Of Congress, 1989). Ho Chi 
Minh first reached out to the United States for assistance in 1919, knowing that his small country needed allies 
to become independent from France. However, it wasn’t until World War II, that Ho Chi Minh successfully 
connected with American officials and worked with the Office of Strategic Services (OSS) to provide infor-
mation about the weather and Japanese troops (Bergin, 2018). Later, his Viet Minh guerrillas joined forces with 
the OSS in July 1945 to establish the OSS Deer Team to disrupt supply lines and transportation of Japanese 
occupation. Alison Kent Thomas, an Officer of the St rategic Service and a leader of the Deer Team provided 
machine guns, a guerrilla team of 50 to 100 men, and military training to the Viet Minh guerillas (Currey, 2005). 
After gaining popular support, the Việt Minh achieved their goal of establishing People's Revolutionary Com-
mittees throughout the northern rural regions (Tønnesson, 2009). These committees were established to assume 
control of local governance once the Viet Minh initiated the August Revolution. The support from the Viet-
namese population and the American OSS eventually contributed to the effective dismantling of Japanese 
forces. As August ap-proached, it was clear that Japan was losing the war, Ho Chi Minh recognized the subse-
quent power vac-uum in Vietnam and took action right on the day Japan surrendered, on August 13, 1945. On 
August 13, 1945, Viet Minh’s “Provisional Committee of Liberated Zone” called for general uprisings across 
the coun-try (Khanh, Huynh Kim, 1971). Local “People Revolutionary Committees” and the Viet Minh in North 
and Central provinces would begin to host mass demonstrations, strikes, and uprisings across major cities like 
Hanoi on August 19. Hue and Da Nang on August 23. The Viet Minh and OSS successfully disarmed Japa -
nese forces and marked Japanese surrender after declaring provisional administration in Saigon, on Au-gust 24, 
1945. These nationwide protests showcased the Vietnamese people's desire for independence, popular mobili-
zation, and the reunification of Vietnam under the Viet Minh party (Hanoi: Van Su Dia, 1957 ). This victory 
and seizure of power from the Japanese which challenged the established colonial authority's grip on govern-
ance, could not be possible without the support within the country and interna-tionally.  
 
Establishment of an Independent Government 
 
The August Revolution led to the establishment of an alternative leadership and governance structure that defied 
French and Japanese authority. This establishment of the Democratic Republic of Vietnam under Ho Chi Minh's 
leadership provided an alternative to French colonial governance, which challenged the narrative of French and 
Japanese indispensability in governing the country. The Declaration of Inde -pendence, read aloud by Ho Chi 
Volume 13 Issue 2 (2024) 
ISSN: 2167-1907
www.JSR.org/hs
4