PHYSICAL EDUCATION DEPARTMENT – Bilingual Programme                                                    I.E.S. FRAY PEDRO DE URBINA                               
 1 
  
BBAADDMMIINNTTOONN  
 
BADMINTON  is a racket sport  played by 
either two opposing players (singles) or two 
opposing pairs (doubles). 
The badminton court is rectangular and is 
divided by a net. 
Players score points by hitting a shuttlecock  
with their racket so that it passes over the net an d 
lands in the other side of the court.  
Competitive badminton is best played 
indoors because shuttlecock flight is affected by w ind. But badminton, as a casual recreational 
activity, can also be played outdoors. 
Badminton has been an Olympic sport  since 1992 (Barcelona), 
HHiissttoorryy  
Games similar to badminton have existed throughout 
history, from ancient Greece to medieval Japan  and colonial 
India , where a form of the game called “poona ” was played. 
In the 1860’s, British Army officers posted to Indi a 
became interested in “Poona”  and took the game home to 
England , where the rules of badminton were set out . 
 
 
This new sport was 
definitively launched in 1873 
 at 
the Badminton House , where the 
Duke of Beaufort introduced the 
game to his guests. The sport was 
then known as "The Game of 
Badminton"  for a number of years, 
until the name was shortened to 
BADMINTON . 
 
 
BADMINTON HOUSE, GLOUCESTERSHIRE painted by JOSEPH APPLEYARD 


PHYSICAL EDUCATION DEPARTMENT – Bilingual Programme                                                    I.E.S. FRAY PEDRO DE URBINA                               
 2 
 
BBAADDMMIINNTTOONN  EEQQUUIIPPMMEENNTT    
Rackets  
Badminton rackets  are light, with top quality rackets 
weighting between 79 and 91 grams including the strings . The 
grip  of the racket is very important. The choice of gri p allows a 
player to increase the thickness of his racket handle  and 
choose a comfortable surface to hold. 
Shuttlecocks  
A shuttlecock (often abbreviated to shuttle  and also 
commonly known as bird  or birdie ) is a projectile with an open 
conical shape.  
There are different types of shuttles: 
Shuttlecocks with feathers 
. They are often used by 
high level players. The cork is covered in goat skin (usually). 
 
        Feathers 
 
 
  Cork base  
 
 
Synthetic shuttles 
 (nylon shuttles).  They are often used by 
recreational players and beginners.  
Feathered shuttles are more expensive and break mor e easily than 
nylon shuttles. 
 
Plastic shuttles 
. They are smaller and it is almost impossible to pla y 
badminton with them. 
 NEVER BUY ONE OF THESE !!!  
  


PHYSICAL EDUCATION DEPARTMENT – Bilingual Programme                                                    I.E.S. FRAY PEDRO DE URBINA                               
 3 
  
BBAADDMMIINNTTOONN  CCOOUURRTT  
Badminton is played on a court  marked for both singles and doubles matches. The c ourt is 
rectangular and divided into halves by a net. The d oubles court is wider than the singles court, but 
both are the same length. The exception, which ofte n causes confusion to newer players, is that the 
doubles court has a shorter serve-length dimension. 
The doubles court  is 6,10 metres wide and 13,40 m. long.                                        
 
 
 
 
The singles court  is a little smaller (5,18 m. wide and 13,40 m. long).  
 
 
 
 
 
The net  is 1,55 m. high. 
 
  
  
  
  
  
      
 
 
 
 
    
 
 
 
 
    
      
      
 
 
 
 
    
 
 
 
 
    
      
Doubles 
court 
Singles 
court 

PHYSICAL EDUCATION DEPARTMENT – Bilingual Programme                                                    I.E.S. FRAY PEDRO DE URBINA                               
 4 
  
BBAADDMMIINNTTOONN  RRUULLEESS  
1.  Scoring system : 3 x 21 rally point scoring system.  
Before May 2006, players could only win a point on their own serve. But the scoring system 
was changed in 2006, and now players can earn a poi nt on their own serve and also when their 
opponent serves. 
Each game  is played with 21 points  (with a margin of at least two points), with players scoring 
a point whenever they win a rally. If the score rea ches 20-all, then the game continues until one side  
gains a two point lead  (such as 24-22), up to a maximum of 30 points  (30-29 is a winning score).  
A match  is the best of three games . (The first player who wins two games wins the match.) 
2.  Service : 
 At the start of the rally, the server and receiver stand in diagonally  opposite service 
courts. 
 The serve must travel diagonally  to be good. 
 The server must hit the birdie  so that it passes over the net and the short servi ce line, 
and would land in the receiver's service court. 
 The server must hit the shuttle from below the waist .  
 There is only one serve .  
 In singles , the server stands: 
⇒  in his right service court when his score is even  (or 0);  
⇒  in his  left  service court when his score is odd . 
 In doubles , if the serving side wins a rally, the same player continues serving, but he 
changes service courts so that he serves to each opponent in turn. If the opponents win 
the rally and their new score is even, the player in the right service court serves; if odd, 
the player in the left service court serves.  
 The winners of the previous game serve first in the following one. 
 The server and receiver must stand inside their respective service courts until the serve 
is made. The server can do deceptive movements to disconcert the opponent (FEINTS). 
            
SIN GLES SERVICE COURT  
DOUBLES SERVICE COURT  
 

PHYSICAL EDUCATION DEPARTMENT – Bilingual Programme                                                    I.E.S. FRAY PEDRO DE URBINA                               
 5 
  
3.  Playing the game : 
 The object of the game is to hit the shuttlecock ba ck and forth over a net without 
permitting it to hit the floor in bounds on your side of the net . 
 The shuttlecock is not allowed to bounce on the floor. 
 
 The rally continues until someone wins it by hittin g a good shot which their opponent 
cannot return, or until someone loses it by hitting a fault. Faults  include: 
⇒  hitting the birdie  into the net; 
⇒  hitting the shuttle outside the court; 
⇒  hitting the bird twice before it goes over the net.  Each side may only strike the 
shuttlecock once before it passes back over the net; 
⇒  carrying the bird on the racket; 
⇒  it is also a fault if the shuttlecock hits the ceiling; 
⇒  touching the net with the racket or any part of the body during play; 
⇒  reaching over the net to hit the shuttlecock. 
 Whoever wins the rally earns one point, and serves to start the next point. 
 A birdie  can hit the net on its way across during play and the rally can continue. 
 The players change ends at the start of the second game; if the match reaches a third 
game, they change ends both at the start of the gam e and when the leading pair's score 
reaches 11 points. 
 All lines are considered in bounds. 
 
BBAADDMMIINNTTOONN  SSTTRROOKKEESS  
1. Forehand and backhand . 
Badminton offers a wide variety of basic strokes. A ll strokes can be played either forehand  
or backhand . A player's forehand side is the same side as his playing hand: for a right-handed player, 
the forehand side is his right side and the backhand side is his left side.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Forehand shot                                                             Backhand shot 


PHYSICAL EDUCATION DEPARTMENT – Bilingual Programme                                                    I.E.S. FRAY PEDRO DE URBINA                               
 6 
 
2. Basic strokes . 
 
You can play upper arm shots  or under arm shots . The choice of stroke depends on: 
- how near the shuttlecock is to the net; 
- how high the birdie is; 
- the current position of the opponent. 
 
Players have much better attacking options if they can reach the shuttle well above net 
height, especially if it is also close to the net . 
 SERVICE  (under waist shot):  
o short service;  
o long service;  
o drive service (hitting the shuttle as far as you can with a horizontal direction and fast);  
o backhand service. 
 CLEAR  (upper arm or overhead shot - hitting the shuttle high and to the back of the 
opponents' court, the rearcourt ): 
o attacking clear - 2; 
o defensive clear - 1; 
 DROP SHOT  - 5 (upper arm or overhead shot - hitting the shut tle so that it falls 
softly downwards into the opponents' forecourt , very close to the net). 
 SMASH  – 4 (upper arm or overhead shot – hitting the shut tle downwards and fast, 
attempting to win the rally immediately). It is also called “kill”. 
 DRIVE  – 3 (hitting the shuttle as far as you can, not too high, horizontally and fast) 
 HAIRPIN NET SHOT  - 6 (under arm shot - hitting the shuttle softly b ack to the 
net) 
 LOB  (under arm shot – hitting the shuttle high and to the back of the opponents’ 
court): 
o attacking lob, used when your opponent is very close to the net;  
o defensive lob, often used to get time enough to return to the midcourt. 
 
                              
1. Defensive clear; 2. Attacking clear; 3. Drive; 4. Smash; 5. Drop shot; 6. Net shot; 7. Lob. 
7 
1 
2 
3 
5 
4 
6 

PHYSICAL EDUCATION DEPARTMENT – Bilingual Programme                                                    I.E.S. FRAY PEDRO DE URBINA                               
 7 
 
BBAADDMMIINNTTOONN  SSTTRRAATTEEGGYY  
To win in badminton, players need to employ a wide variety of strokes in the right situations. 
The position in the court  is also really important. 
Doubles Badminton Strategies  
 During a doubles badminton match, the players can use one of the following strategies: 
Front-Back Position : attacking formation     Side by side Position: defensive formation  
 
 
  
   
      
 
High level players tend to use both, changing positions depending on the situation . 
 When you defend, try to hit the shuttle deep into y our opponent's court. This is to 
prevent your opponent in the front position interce pting the shuttle from mid to front 
court. 
 Whenever is possible try to smash or drive the shut tle to the middle ground between your 
opponents in order to take advantage of confusion and clashes.  
 Another possibility is to play a drop shot or a net  shot, forcing your opponents to lift the 
shuttle. 
 And remember...Teamwork is the success formula in doubles!  
 
Singles Badminton Strategies  
 Remember always to get back to your HOME POSITION  in the midcourt area after 
making each shot. This is a position where you can possibly reach any of your opponent's 
shots. 
 
 
 
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
      
 
 
 
 
    
 
 
 
 
    
      
HOME  POSITION  

PHYSICAL EDUCATION DEPARTMENT – Bilingual Programme                                                    I.E.S. FRAY PEDRO DE URBINA                               
 8 
 
 FOUR CORNERS STRATEGY. Always try to hit the shuttle away from your oppone nt and 
make your opponent move around the court . The singles court is narrower than the 
doubles court, but the same length (with the servic e exception). Since one person needs 
to cover the entire court, singles tactics are base d on forcing the opponent to move as 
much as possible; this means that singles strokes a re normally directed to the corners of 
the court, combining lobs and clears with drop shots and net shots. 
 If you are in a difficult situation during the rall y, you need to make time for yourself to 
get back to a good position. Do this by hitting the  shuttle high towards the back of the 
court, near the middle of the baseline (if possible). 
 Try to use a WIDE VARIETY OF STROKES , depending on the situation. The key is to be 
flexible. 
 One simple badminton strategy often used in singles  is to serve long and high to your 
opponent's back court. This will force your opponen t to move back to the baseline and 
open up his forecourt. 
 Observe your opponent's strength, weakness, favouri te shots and pattern of play. Use it 
to your advantage. 
 
 CONCENTRATION  during the game is also very important to reach any of your opponent’s 
shots.  
 
Badminton Vocabulary  (www.englishclub.com) 
Word Example sentence Meaning 
Ace Jenny's accuracy means she serves 
lots of aces. 
a serve that the opponent fails to hit 
Backcourt I ran to the backcourt to return his 
lob. 
back third of the court (same as 
"rearcourt") 
Backhand If his backhand is weak, play more to 
his left side. 
a stroke made on the side of the body 
opposite the racket side 
Baseline The shuttlecock landed just inside the 
baseline. 
back line of the court 
bird / birdie The U.S. players say birdie instead o f 
shuttlecock. 
shuttlecock (mostly used in North 
America) 
Carry The umpire called my shot a carry, so 
I lost the point. 
an illegal stroke in which the shuttle 
is caught and held on the racket 
before being released; also called a 
"sling" or "throw" 
centre line The centre line divides the court into 
two service courts. 
a line that separates the left and right 
service courts 

PHYSICAL EDUCATION DEPARTMENT – Bilingual Programme                                                    I.E.S. FRAY PEDRO DE URBINA                               
 9 
Clear She hit a clear high and to the back of 
her opponent's court. 
a shot hit deep into the opponent's 
court 
Doubles Why don't you ask her to be your 
partner in mixed doubles? 
a game between teams of two players 
drop shot He was at the back of the court, so I 
played a drop shot and he couldn't 
reach it. 
An upper arm shot that just clears the 
net and then drops sharply 
Drive She played a forehand drive straight 
down the line and won the point. 
a fast hard shot, not too high, with an 
horizontal trajectory 
Fault It is also a fault if the shuttlecock hits 
the ceiling during a rally. 
a foul shot, such as one that hits the 
net or lands outside the court 
Forecourt If you play from the forecourt, you'll 
have a better chance of hitting a 
winner. 
the front third of the court 
home position Players in singles matches try to get  
back to the home position whenever 
they can during a game. 
central position on court which is 
halfway between the baseline and net, 
and the two sidelines 
Lob Her lob flew high into the air and 
dropped into the back of the court, 
just inside the baseline. 
a shot that is hit in a high arc, usually 
over the opponent's head 
Net The shuttlecock hit the top of the net 
and just went over, so she won the 
point. 
the length of meshed material 
supported on a cord between two 
posts that divides the court 
 Net shot / hairpin 
net shot 
Net shots are good to play if your 
opponent is in his or her rearcourt. 
a shot hit from the forecourt that just 
clears the net and drops sharply 
racket (also 
racquet ) 
A badminton racket is smaller and 
lighter than a tennis racket. 
the instrument used by players to hit 
the shuttlecock 
Rally The crowd applauded after watching 
another long, exciting rally. 
a series of shots hit back and forth 
across the net 
Rearcourt Players try not to get caught in the 
rearcourt if possible. 
rear third of the court (same as 
"backcourt") 
Serve / service In tennis players use overhead serv es, 
but in badminton they use underarm 
serves. 
a shot which begins play 
service court You have to serve from inside your 
own service court. 
the area into which a serve must be 
hit 
Smash/”kill” Dan jumped high in the air and hit a 
powerful smash to win the rally. 
a powerful overhead shot 
Wood shot He was lucky when he hit a wood 
shot and the shuttlecock still went 
over the net. 
a legal shot in which the shuttlecock 
hits the frame of the racket 

PHYSICAL EDUCATION DEPARTMENT – Bilingual Programme                                                    I.E.S. FRAY PEDRO DE URBINA                               
 10  
  
AACCTTIIVVIITTIIEESS  
1. Write the proper stroke below each diagram.  (Strokes: clear, drop shot, smash, drive, 
hairpin net shot, lob. ) 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                      
 
 
 2. Draw a badminton court and mark: a) the singles playing court; b) the doubles 
playing court; c) the net; d) the short service lin e; e) the singles service court; f) the 
doubles service court. 
 
 
 
  
3. Put a cross next to the correct answer.   
-British officers brought a game like badminton back from:  a) China   b) India   c) Greece  
-The word "badminton"  was originally the name of: a) an Indian bird  b) a British officer                      
c) an English house  


PHYSICAL EDUCATION DEPARTMENT – Bilingual Programme                                                    I.E.S. FRAY PEDRO DE URBINA                               
 11  
 
-A badminton net is: a) 1,55 m.    b) 1,85 m.      c) 1,35 m.  
-The game begins with: a) an overhead serve   b) a over-waist serve    c) an under-waist serve  
-Hitting the shuttle into the net is: a) a drop shot    b) a net shot     c) a fault  
-To win, the margin in the score must be at least: a) 1 point  b) 2 points  c) 3 points 
-Badminton was first introduced at the: a) Sydney Olympics  b) Seoul Olympics  c) Barcelona  
Olympics 
-In Badminton, a player must serve from the service: a) line   b) lane   c) court 
-An upper arm gentle shot that just goes over the net is a: a) net shot  b) drop shot   c) smash 
-A shot that goes high over the net to the backcourt is a: a) lob   b) net shot   c) drive shot 
-A very hard, long, horizontal and powerful overhead shot is a: a) drive    b) clear   c) smash/”kill” 
-A series of several shots in a row is called a: a) record   b) rally    c) set 
-The central position players try to get to is the: a) home position b) top position c) court position 
-A wood shot is one where the shuttlecock is hit by  the: a) strings of the racket   b) frame of 
the racket    c) handle of the racket 
-Hitting the shuttle twice before it goes over the net is a: a) point    b) double    c) fault 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 www.wikipedia.org ; www.englishclub.com ; www.badminton-information.com  
Playing badminton 
is really funny, 
HEALTHY and 
very easy to learn 
and practise.  
   TRY IT !!