Chapter 8
Scheduling
Any operating system is likely to run with more processes than the computer has CPUs, so a plan
is needed to time-share the CPUs among the processes. Ideally the sharing would be transparent to
user processes. A common approach is to provide each process with the illusion that it has its own
virtual CPU bymultiplexingthe processes onto the hardware CPUs. This chapter explains how xv6
achieves this multiplexing.
Before proceeding with this chapter, please readkernel/proc.h,kernel/swtch.S, and
yield(),sched(), andschedule()inkernel/proc.c.
8.1 Multiplexing
Xv6 multiplexes by switching each CPU from one process to another in two situations. First, xv6
switches when a process makes a system call that blocks (has to wait), for examplereadorwait.
Second, xv6 periodically forces a switch to cope with processes that compute for long periods
without blocking. The former are called voluntary switches, the latter involuntary.
Implementing multiplexing poses a few challenges. First, how to switch from one process to
another? The basic idea is to save and restore CPU registers, though the fact that this cannot be
expressed in C makes it tricky. Second, how to force switches in a way that is transparent to user
processes? Xv6 uses the standard technique in which a hardware timer’s interrupts drive context
switches. Third, all of the CPUs switch among the same set of processes, so a locking plan is
necessary to avoid mistakes such as two CPUs deciding to run the same process at the same time.
Fourth, a process’s memory and other resources must be freed when the process exits, but it cannot
finish all of this itself. Fifth, each CPU of a multi-core machine must remember which process it
is executing so that system calls affect the correct process’s kernel state.
8.2 Context switch overview
The term “context switch” refers to the steps involved in a CPU leaving off execution of one kernel
thread (usually for later resumption), and resuming execution of a different kernel thread; this
75

Kernel
shell cat
user
space
kernel
space kstack 
shell
kstack 
cat
 
kstack
scheduler
save
restoreswtch swtch
Figure 8.1: Switching from one user process to another. In this example, xv6 runs with one CPU
(and thus one scheduler thread).
switching is the heart of multiplexing. Xv6 does not directly context switch from one process’s
kernel thread to another process’s kernel thread; instead, a kernel thread gives up the CPU by
context-switching to that CPU’s “scheduler thread,” and the scheduler thread picks a different
process’s kernel thread to run, and context-switches to that thread.
At a broader scope, the steps involved in switching from one user process to another are illus-
trated in Figure 8.1: a trap (system call or interrupt) from the old process’s user space to its kernel
thread, a context switch to the current CPU’s scheduler thread, a context switch to a new process’s
kernel thread, and a trap return to the user-level process.
8.3 Code: Context switching
The functionswtch()inkernel/swtch.Scontains the heart of thread context switching:
it saves the switched-from thread’s CPU registers, and restores the previously-saved registers of
the switched-to thread. The basic reason this is sufficient is that a thread’s state consist of data in
memory (e.g. its stack) plus its CPU registers; thread memory need not saved and restored because
different threads keep their data in different areas of RAM; but the CPU has only one set of registers
so they must be switched (saved and restored) between threads.
Each thread’sstruct procincludes astruct contextthat holds the thread’s saved
registers when it is not running. A CPU’s scheduler thread’sstruct contextis in that CPU’s
struct cpu. When thread X wishes to switch to thread Y , thread X callsswtch(&X’s context,
&Y’s context).swtch()saves the current CPU registers in X’s context, then loads the con-
tent of Y’s context into the CPU registers, then returns.
Here’s an abbreviated copy ofswtch:
swtch:
sd ra, 0(a0)
sd sp, 8(a0)
sd s0, 16(a0)
...
76

sd s11, 104(a0)
ld ra, 0(a1)
ld sp, 8(a1)
ld s0, 16(a1)
...
ld s11, 104(a1)
ret
a0holds the first function argument, anda1the second; in this case, the twostruct context
pointers.16(a0)refers to an offset 16 bytes into the memory pointed to bya0; referring to the
definition ofstruct contextinkernel/proc.h(1951), this is the structure field called
s0.
Where doesswtch’sretreturn to? It returns to the instruction that theraregister points
to. In the example in which thread X callsswtch()to switch to Y , whenretexecutes,ra
has just been loaded from Y’sstruct context. And therain Y’sstruct contextwas
originally saved by Y’s call toswtchwhen Y gave up the CPU in the past. So theretreturns
to the instruction after the point at which Y calledswtch(); that is, X’s call toswtch()re-
turns as if returning from Y’s original call toswtch(). Andspwill be Y’s stack pointer, since
swtchloadedspfrom Y’sstruct context; thus on return, Y will execute on its own stack.
swtch()need not directly save or restore the program counter; it’s enough to save and restore
ra.
swtch(2902)saves callee-saved registers (ra,sp,s0..s11) but not caller-saved registers.
The RISC-V calling convention requires that if code needs to preserve the value in a caller-saved
register across a function call, the compiler must generate instructions that save the register to the
stack before the function call, and restore from the stack when the function returns. Soswtchcan
rely on the function that called it having already saved the caller-saved registers (either that, or the
calling function didn’t need the values in the registers).
8.4 Code: Scheduling
The last section looked at the internals ofswtch; now let’s takeswtchas a given and examine
switching from one process’s kernel thread through the scheduler to another process. The scheduler
exists in the form of a special thread per CPU, each running theschedulerfunction. This function
is in charge of choosing which process to run next. Each CPU has its own scheduler thread because
more than one CPU may be looking for something to run at any given time. Process switching
always goes through the scheduler thread, rather than direct from one process to another, to avoid
some situations in which there would be no stack on which to execute the scheduler (e.g. if the old
process has exited, or there is no other process that currently wants to run).
A process that wants to give up the CPU must acquire its own process lockp->lock, release
any other locks it is holding, update its own state (p->state), and then callsched. You can see
77

Process 1 Scheduler Process 2
acquire(&p->lock);
...
p->state = RUNNABLE;
swtch(&p->context, ...);
swtch(...); // return
release(&p->lock);
// find a RUNNABLE p
acquire(&p->lock);
p->state = RUNNING;
swtch(...,&p->context);
swtch(&p->context,...); // return
release(&p->lock);
Figure 8.2:swtch()always has the scheduler thread as either source or destination, and the
relevantp->lockis always held.
this sequence inyield(2629),sleepandkexit.schedcallsswtchto save the current context
inp->contextand switch to the scheduler context incpu->context.swtchreturns on the
scheduler’s stack as thoughscheduler’sswtchhad returned(2582).
scheduler(2558)runs a loop: find a process to run,swtch()to it, eventually it willswtch()
back to the scheduler, which continues its loop. The scheduler loops over the process table look-
ing for a runnable process, one that hasp->state == RUNNABLE. Once it finds a process, it
sets the per-CPU current process variablec->proc, marks the process asRUNNING, and then calls
swtchto start running it(2577-2582). At some point in the past, the target process must have called
swtch(); the scheduler’s call toswtch()effectively returns from that earlier call. Figure 8.2
illustrates this pattern.
xv6 holdsp->lockacross calls toswtch: the caller ofswtchacquires the lock, but it’s re-
leased in the target afterswtchreturns. This arrangement is unusual: it’s more common for the
thread that acquires a lock to also release it. Xv6’s context switching breaks this convention be-
causep->stateandp->contextmust be updated together atomically. For example, ifp->lock
were released before invokingswtch, a different CPUcmight decide to run the process because
its state isRUNNABLE. CPUcwill invokeswtchwhich will restore fromp->contextwhile the
original CPU is still saving intop->context. The result would be that the process would be re-
stored with partially-saved registers on CPUcand that both CPUs will be using the same stack,
which would cause chaos. Onceyieldhas started to modify a running process’s state to make it
RUNNABLE,p->lockmust remain held until the process has saved all its registers and the sched-
uler is running on its stack. The earliest correct release point is afterscheduler(running on its
own stack) clearsc->proc. Similarly, onceschedulerstarts to convert aRUNNABLEprocess to
78

RUNNING, the lock cannot be released until the process’s kernel thread is completely running (after
theswtch, for example inyield).
There is one case when the scheduler’s call toswtchdoes not end up insched.allocproc
sets the contextraregister of a new process toforkret(2653), so that its firstswtch“returns”
to the start of that function.forkretexists to release thep->lockand set up some control reg-
isters and trapframe fields that are required in order to return to user space. At the end,forkret
simulates the normal return path from a system call back to user space.
8.5 Code: mycpu and myproc
Xv6 often needs a pointer to the current process’sprocstructure. On a uniprocessor one could
have a global variable pointing to the currentproc. This doesn’t work on a multi-core machine,
since each CPU executes a different process. The way to solve this problem is to exploit the fact
that each CPU has its own set of registers.
While a given CPU is executing in the kernel, xv6 ensures that the CPU’stpregister always
holds the CPU’s hartid. RISC-V numbers its CPUs, giving each a uniquehartid.mycpu(2178)uses
tpto index an array ofcpustructures and return the one for the current CPU. Astruct cpu
(1971)holds a pointer to theprocstructure of the process currently running on that CPU (if any),
saved registers for the CPU’s scheduler thread, and the count of nested spinlocks needed to manage
interrupt disabling.
Ensuring that a CPU’stpholds the CPU’s hartid is a little involved, since user code is free to
modifytp.startsets thetpregister early in the CPU’s boot sequence, while still in machine
mode(1094). While preparing to return to user space,prepare_returnsavestpin the trampoline
page, in case user code modifies it. Finally,uservecrestores that savedtpwhen entering the
kernel from user space(3127). The compiler guarantees never to modifytpin kernel code. It
would be more convenient if xv6 could ask the RISC-V hardware for the current hartid whenever
needed, but RISC-V allows that only in machine mode, not in supervisor mode.
The return values ofcpuidandmycpuare fragile: if the timer were to interrupt and cause the
thread to yield and later resume execution on a different CPU, a previously returned value would
no longer be correct. To avoid this problem, xv6 requires code to disable interrupts before calling
cpuid()ormycpu(), and only enable interrupts when done using the returned value.
The functionmyproc(2187)returns thestruct procpointer for the process that is running
on the current CPU.myprocdisables interrupts, invokesmycpu, fetches the current process pointer
(c->proc) out of thestruct cpu, and then enables interrupts. The return value ofmyprocis
safe to use even if interrupts are enabled: if a timer interrupt moves the calling process to a different
CPU, itsstruct procpointer will stay the same.
8.6 Real world
The xv6 scheduler implements a simple scheduling policy that runs each process in turn. This
policy is calledround robin. Real operating systems implement more sophisticated policies that,
79

for example, allow processes to have priorities. The idea is that a runnable high-priority process
will be preferred by the scheduler over a runnable low-priority process. These policies can become
complex because there are often competing goals: for example, the operating system might also
want to guarantee fairness and high throughput.
8.7 Exercises
1. Modify xv6 to use only one context switch when switching from one process’s kernel thread
to another, rather than switching through the scheduler thread. The yielding thread will need
to select the next thread itself and callswtch. The challenges will be to prevent multiple
CPUs from executing the same thread accidentally; to get the locking right; and to avoid
deadlocks.
80