© 2021 Center for Work, Health, and Well-being.  
All Rights Reserved.  
 TOOLBOX TALK: 
Stress Management 
Speaker: Safety Manager/Foreman Audience: Workers 
I. Introduction
We are here today to focus on stress management and job stress, specifically to 
talk about what stress is, its threats to health and happiness, sources of job 
stress, and solutions.  
Stress if a buzzword we hear all the time in lots of different contexts – stress at 
work, stress at home. We hear about it in commercials, newspaper ads, from our 
doctors, from people who care about us. What does stress mean to you? Ask 
workers.  
Stress is an important topic for everyone and especially for people working in the 
construction industry, since the job is both physically and mentally demanding.  
II. Different Types of Stress?
There are different types of stress. A stressor can be a one time or short-term 
occurrence, or it can be long lasting.1 We are going to focus on work-related 
stress, which we will call job stress. Job Stress is the harmful physical and 
emotional responses that occur when the job demands and requirements do not 
match the capabilities, resources, or needs of the worker. Job stress can lead to 
poor physical and mental health and even injury.  
Stress if not a sign of weakness or failure. In fact, it probably indicates your overall 
investment in the work you are doing.  
Not all stress is bad. Stress can motivate people to perform, like when they need 
to take a test or interview for a new job. It can even help you in a dangerous 
situation in which you need to run fast for safety. However, job stress is often 
about bigger issues that require solutions.2 
1 

2 
© 2021 Center for Work, Health, and Well-being.  
All Rights Reserved.  
III. Relevance of Topic: Why Stress is Bad for Your Well-being
Stress affects everyone from time to time. A report published by the National 
Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH) states that 40% of workers 
report that their job is “very or extremely stressful.” 1 Does that number strike 
anyone as higher than you would have thought?  
Problems at work are more strongly associated with health complaints than are 
any other life stressor – more so than even financial problems or family 
problems.2  Again, surprising?  
Health care expenses are nearly 50% greater for workers who report high levels of 
stress. Chronic job stress can put you at risk for:  
• Substance abuse • PTSD
• Aggression3 • Workplace Injury
• Cardiovascular Disease • Suicide
• Musculoskeletal Disorders • Cancer
• Depression • Ulcers
• Anxiety • Impaired Immune Function
IV. What Causes Work Stress?
Working conditions can play a direct role in causing job stress. Individual and 
situational factors also contribute to stress related to work. Conditions that may 
lead to stress include:  
• The Design of Tasks (heavy workload, not getting breaks, etc.)
• Management Style (poor communication between workers and 
management)
• Co-worker Relationships
• Work Rules (roles and expectations are not clear)
• Career Concerns (job insecurity, lack of growth opportunity or 
promotion, unexpected changes)
• Environmental Conditions of Work (unpleasant or dangerous physical 
conditions like noise, air pollution, or ergonomic problems)

3 
© 2021 Center for Work, Health, and Well-being.  
All Rights Reserved.  
IV. Recognizing the Signs and Symptoms of Stress
You may not always be aware of your body’s response to stress. Routine stress 
may be hard to notice at first because of the source of the stress is constant and 
does not have a clear start or stop. Warning Signs of Stress include3:  
• Headache
• Sleep disturbances/difficulty sleeping
• Difficulty concentrating
• Short Temper
• Upset Stomach
• Job dissatisfaction
• Low morale
V. How to Deal with Job Stress (how to make changes that lead to less stress)
Anybody here have some things they do to get rid of stress? There are many 
ways!  
1. It is helpful first to reflect on exactly what part of work is causing stress. 
Look back to the causes of stress previously mentioned.
a. What elements can you change?
b. What elements require communication with others?
c. What can be changed about your work environment?
d. What resources do you need?
2. Ways to Manage Stress at Work:
a. Utilize your social connections
i. Talk to people around you at work including co-workers or 
your boss if you feel comfortable, and at home
b. Take breaks when you need them3
c. Be aware of your health and stay on top of your care
d. Exercise to boost your mood and reduce stress
e. Do relaxation activities (even setting aside time to sit and listen to 
music without distractions counts)
f. Know when to talk to a healthcare provider if you are overwhelmed
3. Characteristics of healthy, low-stress work organizations that you can work 
towards with your colleagues:
a. Recognition of employees for good work performance (telling 
someone they did well, giving bonuses for good work)

4 
© 2021 Center for Work, Health, and Well-being.  
All Rights Reserved.  
b. Opportunities for career development (allowing workers
opportunities to advance)
c. An organizational culture that values the individual worker
d. Management actions that are consistent with organizational values
(rewarding employees for good safety behavior)
e. Are there any other examples you can think of?
4. Everybody contributes to a healthy, low-stress culture at work. It is on
everyone to work together, communicate, and help each other combat job
stress.
VI. Conclusion
We have a limited amount of time here, so I want to make sure you take note of 
the resources we have provided. It is important to remember that you are your 
own biggest ally when it comes to stress. Though sometimes stress can be visible 
to friends, co-workers, and loved ones, you are the best judge of how you feel and 
what is causing you stress.  
Resources 
1. "5 Things You Should Know About Stress." National Institute of Mental Health.
https://www.nimh.nih.gov/health/publications/stress/index.shtml
2. "Stress in the Workplace" Safety and Health (2016, March 01)
http://www.safetyandhealthmagazine.com/articles/stress-in-the-workplace-2
3. "Workplace Stress." NIOSH Science Blog (2007. December 3). https://blogs.cdc.gov/niosh- 
science-blog/2007/12/03/stress/

5 
© 2021 Center for Work, Health, and Well-being.  
All Rights Reserved.  


6 
© 2021 Center for Work, Health, and Well-being.  
All Rights Reserved.