29                                          Religious Studies Review Vol. 1, No. 3 – October 2007 
 
 
Revolution and Religion in Vietnam 
 
 
ĐỖ QUANG HƯNG*
 
ABSTRACT: By analysis on rich and original  materials regarding government’s 
attitude and policies on religion, the author  asserts that the August Revolution 1945 
had scored initial achievements in solving at the first step the religious issue 
Vietnam, together with many other issues  of the national warfare and the people’s 
livelihood in and after the birth of the Democratic Republic of Vietnam. The 
Vietnamese Communists, guided by the doctrine on religion of Marxist-Leninism and 
by the thought of Hồ Chí Minh, had chosen the right approach toward religious issue 
thus created the base for religious policies of the Sate of Vietnam  up to present.  
 
The August Revolution (1945) and Religious Issues 
The August Revolution was a great event,  the launching pod for important leaps 
forward of our nation, our country in the era of National Independence and Socialism 
in the 20th century. 
The deep characteristic feat ure of this revolution was above all, in the national 
character, in the National lib eration of a staunch nation, de termined to preserve its 
cultural identity, its national independence, unification and sovereignty.  
When leading this revolution, the Comm unist Party of Vietnam highlighted by 
Marxist-Leninism and H ồ Chí Minh’s thought was all th e more conscious of this 
matter. 
Even in “the eve of the revolution”, in the war-base of Vi ệt Bắc, when opening 
the National Conference of Tân Trào, am ong 60 delegates repr esenting political 
parties, national salvation or ganizations from North to South, delegates of different 
ethnic groups and religions were present1. 
                                                 
*. Prof., Dr. Institute of Religious Studies, Vietnamese Academy of Social Sciences. 

 
30                                           Religious Studies Review Vol. 1, No. 3 – October 2007 
The Indochinese Communist Party (the previous name of the Vietnamese 
Communist Party) by then had issued a proclamation cons isting of 10 points, as an 
uprising program. In this proclamation, the 5th point stipulated: "To promulgate the 
rights of the people, for the people: human  rights, rights of property (rights of 
ownership), civic rights, rights of universal suffrage, democratic liberties (freedom of 
religion, of thought, of speech, of  reunion, of circulation), eq uality of rights between 
nationalities, between men and women.”)2
On 25 August 1945, in Hanoi when the power  was just in the hands of the Việ t 
Minh, H ồ Chí Minh, President of the National Liberation Committee, signed a 
decision changing this Committee into the Temporary Government in which a 
famous Catholic personality Nguyễ n M ạnh Hà was the Minister of the National 
Economy.3  
The August Revolution, personified by H ồ Chí Minh, had attracted many other 
famous Catholic intellectuals like Ngô T ử H ạ, Deputy Minister of the Ministry of 
War Invalids, Doctor Vũ Đình Tụng, the Minister of the Ministry of War Invalids (at 
the end of the anti-French Resistance), Lawyer Nguy ễn Thành V ĩnh, Director of the 
Finance Office of South Vietnam, Chairman of the Organization of Catholics for the 
Salvation of South Vietnam, Tr ần Công Chính, of the Redemptorists at Thái Hà 
village, Hanoi, Secretary of the Central Committee of Catholics for the National 
Salvation
4, Lawyer Thái V ăn Lung, representative of Gia Định at the National 
Assembly, Vice Chairman of the Seventh M ilitary Area (he died on the first days 
when the French provoked hostilities in South Vietnam). 
There were also many remarkable Catholic personalities in the National 
Assembly such as Dr. Nguy ễn T ấn Gi Tr ọng (Official member of the Standing 
Committee in the National Assembly), Ngô T ử H ạ, who acted as Chairman of the 
first session of the National Assembly on 2 March 1946, especially the role of the 
Priest Ph ạm Bá Tr ực, Vice Chairman of the Standing Committee of the National 
Assembly since December 19465. 
In the National Assembly of the Nati onal Resistance there was still Cao Triề u 
Phát (Member of the Standing Committee), whose contributions had been long since 
recognized. 
On two other notable personalities Lê H ữu T ừ and H ồ Ng ọc C ẩn, two bishops 
and Supreme Advisers of the Government, their activities and positions had been 
clearly appraised in the revolutionary history. 
 30

 
Đỗ Quang Hưng. Revolution and Religion in Vietnam                                               31 
 
 The religious policy of the August Re volution had been dealt on in many 
documents. People still recall the first sess ion of the Temporary Government on 3 
September 1945, one day after the State of  the Democratic Republic of Vietnam 
came into being, in which President Hồ Chí Minh pointed out 6 urgent issues, among 
which the sixth issue was es pecially reserved for the policy on religious beliefs: 
"Colonialists and feudalistic made use of  the policy of dividing non-Catholic and 
Catholic compatriots for their dominati on. I propose the Government to issue a 
proclamation: Freedom of beliefs a nd solidarity between Catholics and non-
Catholics”6. 
In September 1945, many important sessions had been organized by the 
temporary Government under the presidency of H ồ Chí Minh. Among them, there 
were up to 4 sessions on the religious issue. The record of the session on 20 
September 1945 noted:” Freedom of beliefs being a principle of the democratic 
republic regime, our Government stipulat es: “First, temples, pagodas, imperial 
tombs, churches, any places of religious ch aracter, any religions should be respected 
by the people, and they cannot be violated.”7
The author of this article has published a number of decrees of the Government 
of the Democratic Republic of Vietnam in 1945-1946 in a recent article8. 
The thought of H ồ Chí Minh on the great national union, on the freedom of 
religious beliefs had been deeply impregna ted in the highest power organ. In his 
concluding speech, Tôn Đức Th ắng, Vice Chairman of the Standing Committee of 
the National Assembly, First Session, on 9 November 1946, said: “If anybody had 
class, party, religion prejudices, when coming to this room he would ... let his heart 
follow the highest and most sacred call am ong all other calls in ordinary occasions: 
the call of the Fatherland. This atmosphere  has completely reflected the general 
situation... the general unity of will and action...”
9
In this article, I made public a number  of other important documents of the 
Indochinese Communist Party. 
 One should say immediately that the August Revolution was successful at a date, 
which seen from the religious angle, was not favorable. 
The anti-Communist tendency was increasi ngly clear and cynical under the reign 
of the Popes such as Pius XI, Pius XII (in and after the II World War). 
 31

 
32                                           Religious Studies Review Vol. 1, No. 3 – October 2007 
Even until 1951, in the Mess age of the Evangelic Mess enger, Pope Pius still 
reaffirmed: “The Church has condemned ma ny different sects be longing to Marxist 
socialism. The Church still maintains this verdict for the duty and eternal interest of 
the Church is to stop short strong and da ngerous flows of the present Communist 
doctrine which are being propagated everywhere.”10
Meanwhile, leftist viewpoints of Stalin and the International Communism (1919-
1943) on religious issues, still had a strong influence in Eastern Communist Parties. 
After the August Revolution, some localitie s of our country, were more or less 
influenced by these viewpoints. 
On the Sự Th ật (The Truth) issue No. 30 (6 April 1946,) under the pen-name of 
T.C, Tr ường Chinh wrote an importan t article under the title “ To overthrow an 
erroneous tendency, Not to intrude into the people’s beliefs” covering the whole page 
5. 
The author began by pointing out two concrete affairs after the August 
Revolution.  
- The village P.G in the outskirts of Hanoi, in the recent T ết celebration (1946), 
the village Administrative Committee, forbade the selling of votive papers at the 
market, it meant that it forbade the people to make offering to their  ancestors in the 
Tết celebration. 
- The village X.C. in B ắc Ninh province, on the pret ext of making use of the 
communal house to open a handicraft workshop, ordered to move out cult objects for 
the guardian spirit to the communal hous e of a neighboring hamlet, and villagers 
complained: “Under the democratic regime, the guardian spirit has to evacuate.” 
Then, the author gave a deep analysis: 
“These manifestations expressed a c onspicuous reform spirit, wanting to 
revolutionize also culture, be liefs, customs... This is an expression of the excessive 
revolutionary spirit, of the leftist infantilism. Our August revolution also brings about 
its leftist infantile errors.”11  
Trường Chinh also rejected ideas holding that in this manner, Marxists advocated 
corrupted things in the old regime. The issue was “to educate the people to 
understand why superstition is erroneous, bad habits are silly. But one should not 
forbid in a hurry.” Moreover, on political aspect, the author concluded: “If in order to 
reform customs and beliefs, we create divi sion in the Unified Front of the People 
 32