3.1 General Neurochemistry Principles
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you should be able to
3.1.1 Explain the basic mechanisms that neurons use to produce and release neurotransmitters
3.1.2 Describe the ways that neurotransmitters interact with receptors
In the following sections, you will learn general principles about brain chemistry. Neurons access nutrients from the
diet, or from their own neuronal membranes, to produce the neurotransmitters that underlie behavior. These
nutrients, including amino acids, fatty acids or sugar molecules, are taken inside a neuron or glial cell where they are
acted upon by enzymes to produce a neurotransmitter that is stored in a vesicle and later released in response to
specific intracellular signals. Neurons release the most recently produced neurotransmitter molecules first, thus
guaranteeing that the communication between neurons is successful.
How do neurons produce neurotransmitters?
Neurotransmitters are produced inside neurons. Their production depends upon the neuron obtaining an adequate
supply of precursors from the blood. This is not as easy as it sounds. The production of neurotransmitters requires a
variety of amino acids, sugar, fats, vitamins, and minerals. These nutrients float around in the blood after each meal.
Every cell in the body competes with the brain for access to these nutrients. The brain is at a distinct disadvantage
because it sits behind a firewall called the blood-brain barrier (see Chapter 1 Structure and Function of the Nervous
System: Cells and Anatomy). However, fortunately, the blood-brain barrier possesses a variety of specialized
transporting mechanisms that can actively transfer nutrients into the brain (Step 1 in Figure 3.3). Once a nutrient
crosses the blood-brain barrier it is usually transported to neurons with the assistance of astrocytes.
126 3 • Basic Neurochemistry
Access for free at openstax.org

FIGURE 3.3 Neurotransmitter lifecycle
After an amino acid, fatty acid or sugar molecule is inside a neuron, it is generally acted upon by synthesizing
enzymes (Step 2 in Figure 3.3). Enzymes are proteins that help build, breakdown or otherwise modify substances in
our cells. The action of many of these enzymes uses metal ions as co-factors to assist with the conversion process.
For example, neurons in the substantia nigra contain iron, neurons in the hippocampus contain zinc, neurons in the
locus coeruleus contain copper, and neurons in the red nucleus contain cobalt. The presence of these metals is
critical for normal neurotransmitter metabolism.
Brains demonstrate a degree of energy efficiency in terms of which of these transmitters it utilizes most extensively.
For example, GABA and glutamate are simple amino acids and are the most abundant neurotransmitters in the
human brain. They require only single-step enzymatic modification. Four amine neurotransmitters (dopamine,
norepinephrine, epinephrine, and serotonin) require enzymatic modification of dietary amino acids to produce and
inactivate. The brain contains 1000-fold fewer of these amine-releasing neurons, as compared to glutamate and
GABA, probably because they require more energy to function. Finally, the other, far less abundant
neurotransmitters, such as the neuropeptides (which are a string of amino acids) require a considerable amount of
energy by the neuron to produce and inactivate. Neuropeptides occur roughly one-million-fold lower concentration
in the brain than glutamate and GABA. These neurotransmitters, as well as the fat-derived neurotransmitters
endocannabinoids and prostaglandins, all utilize the DNA in the nucleus to produce the necessary enzymes and
precursors. The endogenous levels of these two fat-derived are kept quite low and are produced only when needed.
3.1 • General Neurochemistry Principles 127

How are neurotransmitters stored and released?
Once synthesized, most neurotransmitter molecules are then actively transported into synaptic vesicles (step 3
Figure 3.3); these are very tiny spheres clustered at the presynaptic terminal with hollow centers into which
approximately 10,000 molecules of a typical neurotransmitter can be stored for later release from a neuron.
Neurons pay attention to the shelf life of their neurotransmitters; they prefer to release the most recently produced
neurotransmitter molecules first. This means that the freshest products are released first, thus guaranteeing that
the communication between neurons is successful. Many neurons produce two (and rarely three) different
neurotransmitters; each is stored inside different vesicles and are released independently of each other.
The arrival of the action potential at the end of the axon opens a group of voltage-dependent calcium channels that
allows the entry of calcium ions (see Chapter 2 Neurophysiology). The elevated intracellular concentration of
calcium ions initiates the next step in the communication of one neuron with the next: A synaptic vesicle either
merges into its cell wall (both are made of lipids so imagine two soap bubbles coming together), or opens a small
pore into the neuronal membrane, and releases the neurotransmitter into the small space between neurons, called
a synaptic cleft (step 4 Figure 3.3). Figure 3.4 shows the process of vesicle fusion in more detail. The junction at
which two neurons communicate via the release of a neurotransmitter molecule is called a synapse. Because the
synapse is such a small space, the concentration of neurotransmitter molecules in the synapse following release
becomes very high for a brief period.
FIGURE 3.4 Vesicle fusion
Post-synaptic actions of neurotransmitters
Once released into the synapse, neurotransmitter molecules briefly interact or bind with a protein, called a
receptor, that is (usually) located on the surface of the neuron on the other side of the synapse (step 5 in Figure
3.3). These receptors are divided into two general types: either ionotropic or metabotropic receptors (Figure 3.5).
Ionotropic receptors are transmembrane molecules that can “open” or “close” a channel that would allow smaller
particles to travel in and out of the cell. Ionotropic receptors allow different kinds of ions to travel in and out of the
cell. Ionotropic receptors are not opened (or closed) all the time. They are generally closed until another small
molecule (called a ligand — in our case, a neurotransmitter) binds to the receptor. As soon as the ligand binds to the
receptor (step 1 in the left side of Figure 3.5), the receptor changes conformation (the protein that makes up the
channel changes shape), and, as they do so, they create a small opening that is big enough for ions to travel through
(step 2 in the left side of Figure 3.5). Therefore, ionotropic receptors are called “ligand-gated transmembrane ion
channels”. The abrupt change in concentration of these ions induces secondary biochemical processes which may
128 3 • Basic Neurochemistry
Access for free at openstax.org

have either short-term or long-term consequences on the post-synaptic neuron’s behavior.
Metabotropic receptors do not have a “channel” that opens or closes. Instead, they are linked to another small
chemical called a “G-protein.” As soon as a ligand binds the metabotropic receptor (step 1 in the right side of Figure
3.5), the receptor “activates” the G-protein (it basically changes the G-protein shape). Once activated, the G-protein
itself goes on and activates another molecule (step 2 in the right side of Figure 3.5). This new molecule is called a
“secondary messenger.” A secondary messenger is a chemical whose function is to go and activate other particles.
So far, this process is common to all metabotropic receptors. What happens from there on is different for every
metabotropic receptor. In some cases, the secondary messenger travel until it binds to and opens ion channels
located somewhere else on the membrane (step 3 in the right side of Figure 3.5). In some cases, the secondary
messenger will go and activate other intermediate molecules inside the cell. The important thing to remember is
that metabotropic receptors do not have ion channels, and binding of a ligand may or may not result in the opening
of ion channels at different sites on the membrane. But they will always activate a G-protein that will in turn activate
secondary messengers. G-protein coupled receptors are a large group of evolutionarily related proteins that are
very common in the brain and body; over eight hundred human genes are devoted to producing these proteins.
FIGURE 3.5 Metabotropic vs ionotropic receptors
Despite many safeguards, the synaptic communication processes described above often fail because the vesicles
are empty or do not fuse properly, or the neurotransmitters are oxidized and therefore inactive (Linden, 2007).
Neural systems have a built-in redundancy that allows them to compensate for failures in single neurons. Brains try
to be energy efficient and not waste neurotransmitters. Many, but not all, neurotransmitters, or components of them
after enzymatic inactivation, are re-absorbed by the axon terminal and re-used. Finally, although neurons utilize
components of the diet to produce neurotransmitters, the production of neurotransmitters is rarely significantly
enhanced by dietary supplements.
Ending neurotransmitter action
After most neurotransmitters are released into the synaptic cleft they need to be inactivated. The primary
mechanism for inactivation is reuptake (step 7 in Figure 3.3). Reuptake is the reabsorption of a neurotransmitter via
a protein transporter located on the (pre-synaptic) membrane of the axon terminal. Reuptake allows for the
recycling of neurotransmitters. Because neurotransmitter molecules are large and hydrophilic, they cannot simply
diffuse through the membrane; this is why specific transporter proteins are necessary.
3.1 • General Neurochemistry Principles 129

Neurons benefit from feedback on how much neurotransmitter they are releasing at their axonal terminals. This
feedback is provided by a special type of protein receptor called an autoreceptor (step 6 in Figure 3.3).
Autoreceptors are located on the membranes of nerve cells. They may be located on the cell body or the axonal
terminal. These receptors are only sensitive to the neurotransmitters released by the neuron on which the
autoreceptor sits. Activation of an autoreceptor usually leads to a reduction in the rate of release of the cell's
neurotransmitter.
130 3 • Basic Neurochemistry
Access for free at openstax.org